title: xqillac
slug: xqillac
date: 2013-05-18 23:34:15+00:00

<a href="https://github.com/FauxFaux/xqillac">xqillac</a> is a fork of the <a href="http://xqilla.sourceforge.net/">xqilla</a> command-line <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/XQuery">XQuery</a> processor to.. make it work better from the command line.  XQuery is a language for searching and editing XML; a superset of XPath.

For example, let's say you have some XML coming along a shell pipeline:
<code>
&lt;a&gt;
&nbsp;&nbsp;&lt;b id=&quot;5&quot;&gt;hello&lt;/b&gt;
&nbsp;&nbsp;&lt;b id=&quot;7&quot;&gt;world&lt;/b&gt;
&lt;/a&gt;
</code>

..and you want just the 5th b's text:
<code>
$ printf '&lt;a&gt;&lt;b id=&quot;5&quot;&gt;hello&lt;/b&gt;&lt;b id=&quot;7&quot;&gt;world&lt;/b&gt;&lt;/a&gt;' |
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;xqilla -i /dev/stdin &lt;(echo "data(//b[@id='5'])")
hello
</code>

Groovy.  Much safer than trying to do this kind of thing with regexes or cut or whatever.

However, as you can see, this involves horrible abuse of the shell "<code>&lt;(</code>" operator (which turns a command's output into a file (..well, close enough, right?)), and of <code>/dev/stdin</code>.

In xqillac, this is just:
<code>
printf '&lt;a&gt;&lt;b id=&quot;5&quot;&gt;hello&lt;/b&gt;&lt;b id=&quot;7&quot;&gt;world&lt;/b&gt;&lt;/a&gt;' |
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;xqillac "data(//b[@id='5'])"
</code>

The above shell hack also fails (horribly: "Caught unknown exception"... or worse) if you attempt to use XQuery Update to edit the document in the pipeline:

xqillac allows this (for documents that fit in memory):
<code>
$ printf '&lt;a&gt;&lt;b id=&quot;5&quot;&gt;hello&lt;/b&gt;&lt;b id=&quot;7&quot;&gt;world&lt;/b&gt;&lt;/a&gt;' |
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;xqillac "delete nodes //b[@id='5']"
&lt;a&gt;&lt;b id=&quot;7&quot;&gt;world&lt;/b&gt;&lt;/a&gt;
</code>

Code on <a href="https://github.com/FauxFaux/xqillac">xqillac's github</a>.  Please use the Github functionality for issues and pull requests.

<!--more-->
<hr />

In addition, I've fixed various other things I consider massive bugs:
<ul>
<li>Various error messages actually get handed to the user, instead of being thrown on the floor</li>
<li>Option (enabled by default when invoked as xqillac) to disable going to the Internet to attempt to "resolve" DTDs/namespaces.  It just boggles me that a library would try to do that, and that it's a nasty hack to disable this horrible behaviour.</li>
</ul>

You can use <code>xqillac</code> as <code>xqilla</code> too, just symlink it.

Build instructions:
<ol>
<li>Run <code>make</code>.</li>
<li>Celebrate.</li>
</ol>

It depends on <code>libxqilla-dev</code>.