title: Teensy weensy crypto
slug: nano-rc4
date: 2015-11-12T19:42:29+0000

As the UK's politicians continue to fail to understand what "strong cryptography"
  or "banning" even mean, I thought I would have a look at how simple strong
  cryptography can be.

[nanorc4](https://github.com/FauxFaux/nanorc4/blob/astoria/one.asm)
  is a working [RC4](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/RC4)
  encryption and decryption implementation in 16-bit assembly.  It will run on
  any 32-bit (or, presumably, 16-bit!) Windows machine (which, admittedly,
  are going out of fashion),  and on `dosbox`:

    uwACiB/+w3X6MckxwIjIih6AAP7L9vOI44qHgv6Iy4onAOAAxegvAP7Bdd8xybQIzSH+wYjLAi/o
    HACIy4oXiOsCF4jTihcwwrQCzSG0C80hhMB12c0giMuKF4jrijeIF4jLiDfD

Yep, that's it.  `base64` encoded.  102 bytes, or 138 encoded.  Fits in
  [a tweet](https://twitter.com/fauxicles/status/664900624006385664).
  Probably small enough to memorise.  Certainly pretty hard to ban.

With this (and your computer) you can secure a message with a password in a way
  that's unbreakable.  I can't break it, your government can't break it, other
  people's governments can't break it.  Secure.

Why's it so small?

 1. The problem is (relatively) easy.  This is known as "pre-shared key cryptography",
      or "symmetric cryptography", which are one of the easier problems in the science.
      Things get much harder when you don't have a good way to tell the target the key 
      in advance.
 2. RC4 is surprisingly secure for how simple the code is.
 3. 16-bit assembly, and the COM "format" have no preamble: it's just the code.
      It just starts executing at the start.  (And I hacked at it a bit.)

Demo!

    > echo hi | one.com secure password>out ; in DOS (note: no trailing space)

    $ make c && ./c 'secure password' <out  # on linux
    hi

Should you use it?  No.  There's many important missing features that are present in proper
  symmetric encryption tools, such as proper key derivation, protection against modification,
  [IV](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Initialization_vector)s,
  and fewer bugs.  Yes, even this 102 byte program has some significant bugs I couldn't
  be bothered to fix.

Is RC4 secure?  For this use-case, yes.  For TLS, most certainly not.  Even today there are
  many plausible attacks against RC4 in the TLS context, but none of them apply to this
  static-data world.

I was actually hoping to be able to fit RC4-drop-N in, which is
  probably secure in many more contexts, but I couldn't get the byte count down to the
  (tweet-derived) target.  I guess this makes for a reasonable golf competition...


Development notes:

 * `dosbox` is pretty annoying, but so is `cmd`.  The `dosbox` debugger is cool, but there
     doesn't seem to be any current documentation on it.  That Forum Post is pretty wrong.
 * `dosbox` doesn't support pipes or `<input` redirection, so I couldn't debug with binary
     files, which is one of the reasons it doesn't work.
 * I have no idea what the actual semantics of the input interrupts are, all the useful
     documentation seems to have been lost to history, or was commercial (and/or paper)
     in the first place.
 * Everything fits in three 256-byte blocks, so the `bh` register == block number, and
     there's no use of memory segmentation (WOOO).
 * block 0: the [PSP](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Program_Segment_Prefix),
    which I couldn't overwrite as it has the key in (as the command-line argument).
 * block 1: the code segment
 * block 2: the 256-byte state for RC4.
 * After the key setup, the bh is left at `2` forever.
 * `cl` and `ch` are used for the `i` and `j` state parts in RC4.

Update:

 * A number of people pointed me at
   [Odzhan's RC4 implementation in normal x86(_64)](https://odzhan.wordpress.com/2015/11/03/ciphers-tiny-rc4-implementation/)
   which shows a much better understanding of actual assembly programming.  For example,
   their "swap" implementation is amazing compared to mine.
 * Some people asked how much hacking it took to get the size down.  It took about six hours,
   but it was great.  I love golf competitions, even if they're just against myself.
 * There was some concern that people might actually accidentally run or incorporate the code
   without understanding the flaws, as there isn't a big enough warning on this page, or on
   github.  These people additionally didn't read any of the rest of the article, where it
   is explained that it's *broken*, *16-bit x86 assembly* which you actually can't run anywhere,
   even if you wanted to.
