title: New blog
slug: new-blog
date: 2015-04-10 22:19:41+01:00

My blog used to be hosted using self-hosted [WordPress](https://wordpress.org/download/).
As part of the most recent yak shaving machine migration, I'd decided to eliminate
PHP from normal web serving.  I looked at a number of static site generators,
but they all had significant issues, specifically:

 * The *awful* formatting in my old blog posts.  WordPress lets you get away with pretty much anything
    except using scheme-relative urls (`//google.com`).
 * Being written in things that were hard to install, or that required specific versions of softare.
    Always a bad sign; I need to be convinced that something I don't care about at all will not require
    any input from me in the next five years.  Looking at things like Jekyll and `pandoc`, but I also had
    issues with Python tools like Hyde.
 * Letting me actually control the output format, so I can waste my life fiddling with CSS.

I was too lazy to move the content across to anything modern, or to work out how to customise any
of the existing solutions to meet my requirements, so I wrote my own; some sed, then some python,
then some kind of markdown library and some more python, and woo.

Notable features:

 * RFC-2822 (`Header: value`) and Markdown/HTML/mixed crap input
 * Totally invalid HTML output
 * Barely valid RSS and Atom feeds
 * No comments, so no spam.  Woo.

It's totally hardcoded to generate the exact site, but it's so small (160loc Python and <100loc of
HTML templates) that you can probably just fork it.  I didn't even name it:
[Faux' blog generator](https://github.com/FauxFaux/blog).

